Add Wasm Blog Posts: Wasm Component Model Part 1 and 2 (#122)
nginx/unit-docs: source/news/2024/wasm-component-model-part-2.rst

:orphan:

##################################################################
The WebAssembly Component Model - The Why, How and What - Part 2
##################################################################

This is Part 2 of our blog series about the Wasm Component Model, it's ecosytem and how to use Wasm Components with NGINX Unit.
In `Part 1 </news/2024/wasm-component-model-part-1>`__ we have covered all the conceptional parts. In this part, we will focus on the process of creating a Wasm Component.

************************************************************************
Tutorial - A Rust based Wasm Component
************************************************************************

Rust is the premier language for WebAssembly development and the most mature in terms of support. In the example, we will use Rust and its ecosystem to create a Wasm Component that can be hosted directly on NGINX Unit.

> This tutorial targets Linux-based operating systems and macOS. If you are on Windows, we recommend using WSL2 (Windows Subsystem for Linux) to follow along. If you haven't already installed NGINX Unit alongside with the WebAssembly language module, please refer to the `docs <https://unit.nginx.org/installation/#official-packages>`__ on how to do it or use the official `Docker Image <https://unit.nginx.org/installation/#docker-images>`__ **unit:wasm**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial targets Linux-based operating systems and MacOS. If you are on Windows, we recommend using WSL2 (Windows Subsystem for Linux) to follow along. If you haven't already installed NGINX Unit alongside the WebAssembly language module, please refer to the `docs <https://unit.nginx.org/installation/#official-packages>`__ on how to do it or use the official `Docker Image <https://unit.nginx.org/installation/#docker-images>`__ **unit:wasm**.
```

=============================
Rust Development Setup
=============================

Let's start by installing the Rust ecosystem, if not already done. At the time of writing, Rust 1.76 is the latest stable version. 
To install Rust, see the instructions on their `website <https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install>`__.

After the installation completes, you can confirm the current version of Rust by running:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ rustc -V
   rustc 1.76.0 (07dca489a 2024-02-04)

To work with Wasm Components, we need some additional tooling. This is a one-time setup for you to be able to write Rust source code and compile it to a Wasm Component.

======================================
Add the wasm32-wasi compiler target
======================================

The wasm32-wasi compiler target will provide general Wasm support to your rustc installation. Add the target by running:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ rustup target add wasm32-wasi

======================================
Install cargo-component
======================================

**cargo-component** will add a cargo subcommand to build Wasm Components without any intermediate steps from our Rust project. 

> To install the latest version run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install the latest version, run the following command:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ cargo install cargo-component

=================================================
Install wasmtime runtime and CLI for testing
=================================================

The wasmtime-cli will be used to test and play around with the Wasm component. At the time of writing, we are using Wasmtime 18. 

> To install the latest version of Wasmtime run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install the latest version of Wasmtime, run:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ curl https://wasmtime.dev/install.sh -sSf | bash

> For more information about Wasmtime and installing it, see their `Github repository <https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime/>`__

Author: ```suggestion
For more information about Wasmtime and installing it, see their `GitHub repository <https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime/>`__
```

Once we have all the tools in place, we can create the Rust projects.

.. _tutorial-rust-based-wasm-component:
==========================================================================
Using the **wasi** Rust library
==========================================================================

Our experience with the official WASI Rust library was very interesting and exciting. The component build time was fascinating, and the library has a low dependency footprint. However, there are some costs in terms of developer experience. See for yourselves:

Start by creating a new Wasm Component using **cargo component**:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ cargo component new --lib test-wasi-component

> At the time of writing, the wasi crate (Version 0.12.1) available on `crates.io <https://crates.io/crates/wasi>`__ didn't include the latest version available on GitHub. As we are making use of a Macro in Rust, we will have to clone the repository <https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasi>`__ and reference it from our new Wasm Component project.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
At the time of writing, the wasi crate (Version 0.12.1) available on `crates.io <https://crates.io/crates/wasi>`__ didn't include the latest version available on GitHub. As we are making use of a Macro in Rust, we will have to clone the `repository <https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasi>`__ and reference it from our new Wasm Component project.

```

The actual code from **src/lib.rs** should look like this:

.. code-block:: rust

   use wasi::http::types::{
      Fields, IncomingRequest, OutgoingBody, OutgoingResponse, ResponseOutparam,
   };

   wasi::http::proxy::export!(Component);

   struct Component;

   impl wasi::exports::http::incoming_handler::Guest for Component {
      fn handle(_request: IncomingRequest, response_out: ResponseOutparam) {

         let hdrs = Fields::new();
         let mesg = String::from("Hello, This is a Wasm Component using wasi/http:proxy!");
         let _try = hdrs.set(&"Content-Type".to_string(), &[b"plain/text".to_vec()]);
         let _try = hdrs.set(&"Content-Length".to_string(), &[mesg.len().to_string().as_bytes().to_vec()]);

         let resp = OutgoingResponse::new(hdrs);

         // Add the HTTP Response Status Code
         resp.set_status_code(200).unwrap();

         let body = resp.body().unwrap();
         ResponseOutparam::set(response_out, Ok(resp));

         let out = body.write().unwrap();
         out.blocking_write_and_flush(mesg.as_bytes()).unwrap();
         drop(out);

         OutgoingBody::finish(body, None).unwrap();
      }
   }

> Targeting the wasi crate requires some low-level Rust work by us. Not bad at all, but something to consider when choosing this option. For the **wasi:http/proxy** world there is an interface description available on `Github <https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-http/blob/main/proxy.md>`__ which will help to write your code.

Author: ```suggestion
Targeting the wasi crate requires some low-level Rust work by us. Not bad at all, but something to consider when choosing this option. For the **wasi:http/proxy** world there is an interface description available on `GitHub <https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-http/blob/main/proxy.md>`__ which will help to write your code.
```

To test the Component, we can use wasmtime serve.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ wasmtime serve target/wasm32-wasi/release/test_wasi_component.wasm

The output should look like the following:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ wasmtime serve target/wasm32-wasi/release/test_wasi_component.wasm
     Serving HTTP on http://0.0.0.0:8080/

Sending a request to the exposed endpoint will output something like this:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ curl -v localhost:8080
   …
   > GET / HTTP/1.1
   > Host: localhost:8080
   > User-Agent: curl/8.4.0
   > Accept: */*
   >
   < HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   < content-type: plain/text
   < content-length: 54
   < date: Tue, 12 Mar 2024 12:28:56 GMT
   <
   * Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
   Hello, This is a Wasm Component using wasi/http:proxy!

************************************************************************
NGINX Unit for production grade Wasm workloads
************************************************************************

While the **wasmtime-cli**  interface is good for testing Wasm components locally, there are more requirements for production workloads. 

> With NGINX Units Wasm runtime, you will be able to run your Wasm workloads next to other host applications on a single host and make use of all the other powerful Unit features. Given Units design and as we decoupled the listeners from the application runtime, you can make full use of the Unit Router to make routing decisions before sharing a request with your Wasm Component or add HTTPS to your stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With NGINX Units Wasm runtime, you will be able to run your Wasm workloads next to other host applications on a single host and make use of all the other powerful Unit features. Given Units design and as we have decoupled the listeners from the application runtime, you can make full use of the Unit Router to make routing decisions before sharing a request with your Wasm Component or add HTTPS to your stack.
```

> To run the component on NGINX Unit, start Unit and send the initial configuration, make sure you point to the Wasm component by using an absolute path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the component on NGINX Unit, start Unit, and send the initial configuration, make sure you point to the Wasm component by using an absolute path.
```

            "component": "path/target/wasm32-wasi/release/test_wasi_component.wasm"
         }
      }
   }   

Apply the configuration using **unitc**:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ unitc config.json /config

Sending a request to the exposed endpoint will create the same output from a different runtime implementation:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ curl -v localhost:8085
   …
   < HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   < content-type: plain/text
   < content-length: 54
   < Server: Unit/1.32.0
   < Date: Tue, 12 Mar 2024 15:16:13 GMT
   <
   * Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
   Hello, This is a Wasm Component using wasi/http:proxy!

This is the full power of Wasm Components. Build once - run on every runtime.

************************************************************************
What's next?
************************************************************************

The Wasm ecosystem and all its associated projects are undergoing rapid and positive changes. Every week brings new features and opportunities for innovation. NGINX Unit remains dedicated to Wasm and will continue implementing new features in our Wasmtime integration and publishing technical blog posts about Wasm.

> Feel free to share your feedback about this blog post on our `GitHub discussions <https://github.com/nginx/unit/discussions>`__ pages. We'd love to know what you think is missing regarding the work with Wasm Components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel free to share your feedback about this blog post on our `GitHub discussions <https://github.com/nginx/unit/discussions>`__ page. We'd love to know what you think is missing regarding the work with Wasm Components.
```

:orphan:

> ************************************************************************
> The WebAssembly Component Model - The Why, How and What - Part 2
> ************************************************************************
> This is Part 2 of our Blog series about the Wasm Component Model, it's ecosytem and how to use Wasm Components with NGINX Unit.
> In `Part 1 </news/2024/wasm-component-model-part-1>`__ we have covered all the conceptional parts. In this Part we will focus on
> the process of creating a Wasm Component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
************************************************************************
The WebAssembly Component Model - The Why, How and What - Part 2
************************************************************************

This is Part 2 of our Blog series about the Wasm Component Model, it's ecosytem and how to use Wasm Components with NGINX Unit.
In `Part 1 </news/2024/wasm-component-model-part-1>`__ we have covered all the conceptional parts. In this part, we will focus on the process of creating a Wasm Component.
```

> ==========================================================================
> Tutorial - A Rust based Wasm Component
> ==========================================================================
> Rust is the premier language of WebAssembly development and the most mature in terms of support. In the example we will use Rust and its ecosystem to 
> create a Wasm Component that can be hosted on directly on NGINX Unit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==========================================================================
Tutorial - A Rust based Wasm Component
==========================================================================

Rust is the premier language for WebAssembly development and the most mature in terms of support. In the example, we will use Rust and its ecosystem to create a Wasm Component that can be hosted directly on NGINX Unit.
```

> This tutorial targets Linux based operating systems and macOS. If you are on Windows, we recommend using WSL2 (Windows Subsystem for Linux) 
> to follow along. If you haven't already installed NGINX Unit alongside with the WebAssembly language module, please refer to the `docs <https://unit.nginx.org/installation/#official-packages>`__ on how to do it 
> or use the official `Docker Image <https://unit.nginx.org/installation/#docker-images>`__ **unit:wasm**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial targets Linux-based operating systems and macOS. If you are on Windows, we recommend using WSL2 (Windows Subsystem for Linux) to follow along. If you haven't already installed NGINX Unit alongside with the WebAssembly language module, please refer to the `docs <https://unit.nginx.org/installation/#official-packages>`__ on how to do it or use the official `Docker Image <https://unit.nginx.org/installation/#docker-images>`__ **unit:wasm**.
```

> ==========================================================================
> Rust Development Setup
> ==========================================================================
> Let's start off by installing the Rust ecosystem if not already done. At the time of writing Rust 1.76 was the latest stable version. 
> To install Rust, see the instructions on their `website <https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install>`__.
> 
> After the installation was successful you can check the current version of Rust by issuing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==========================================================================
Rust Development Setup
==========================================================================

Let's start by installing the Rust ecosystem, if not already done. At the time of writing, Rust 1.76 is the latest stable version. 
To install Rust, see the instructions on their `website <https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install>`__.

After the installation completes, you can confirm the current version of Rust by running:
```

`check` is not an ESL friendly word

.. code-block:: bash

   $ rustc -V
   rustc 1.76.0 (07dca489a 2024-02-04)

> To work with Wasm Components, we need some additional tooling. This is a one-time setup for your machine to be able to write Rust source 
> code and compile it to a WebAssembly Component.

Reviewer: nit: The machine does not write the source code:

```suggestion
To work with Wasm Components, we need some additional tooling. This is a one-time setup for you to be able to write Rust source code and compile it to a WebAssembly Component in your machine.
```

> ==========================================================================
> Add the wasm32-wasi compiler target
> ==========================================================================
> This target will bring general Wasm support to your rustc installation. Add the target by issuing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==========================================================================
Add the wasm32-wasi compiler target
==========================================================================

The wasm32-wasi compiler target will provide general Wasm support to your rustc installation. Add the target by running:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ rustup target add wasm32-wasi

> ==========================================================================
> Install cargo-component
> ==========================================================================
> **cargo-component** will add a cargo subcommand to build Wasm Components without any intermediate steps from our Rust project. 
> To install the latest version issue:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==========================================================================
Install cargo-component
==========================================================================

**cargo-component** will add a cargo subcommand to build Wasm Components without any intermediate steps from our Rust project. 
To install the latest version run the following command:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ cargo install cargo-component

> ==========================================================================
> Install wasmtime runtime and CLI for testing
> ==========================================================================
> The wasmtime-cli will be used to test and play around with the Wasm component. At the time of writing, we are using wasmtime 18. 
> To install the latest version of wasmtime run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==========================================================================
Install wasmtime runtime and CLI for testing
==========================================================================

The wasmtime-cli will be used to test and play around with the Wasm component. At the time of writing, we are using Wasmtime 18. 
To install the latest version of Wasmtime run:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ curl https://wasmtime.dev/install.sh -sSf | bash

> For more information about wasmtime and installing it, see their `Github repository <https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime/>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about Wasmtime and installing it, see their `Github repository <https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime/>`__
```

> Now, as we have all the tooling in place, we can create the Rust projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we have all the tools in place, we can create the Rust projects.
```

.. _tutorial-rust-based-wasm-component:

> ==========================================================================
> Using the **wasi** Rust library
> ==========================================================================
> The official WASI Rust library was a very interesting and exciting test for us! The component build time was fascinating and it 
> comes with a low dependency footprint. But at some costs in terms of developer experience. But see for yourselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==========================================================================
Using the **wasi** Rust library
==========================================================================

Our experience with the official WASI Rust library was very interesting and exciting. The component build time was fascinating, and the library has a low dependency footprint. However, there are some costs in terms of developer experience. See for yourselves:
```

> Start by creating a new Wasm Component using cargo component:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by creating a new Wasm Component using the cargo component:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ cargo component new --lib test-wasi-component

> At the time of writing, the wasi create (Version 0.12.1) available on `crates.io <https://crates.io/crates/wasi>`__ didn't include the latest version available on 
> GitHub. As we are making use of an Macro in Rust, we will have to clone the `repository <https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasi>`__ and reference it from our new Wasm Component 
> project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of writing, the wasi crate (Version 0.12.1) available on `crates.io <https://crates.io/crates/wasi>`__ didn't include the latest version available on GitHub. As we are making use of a Macro in Rust, we will have to clone the repository <https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasi>`__ and reference it from our new Wasm Component project.
```

Clone the bytecodealliances wasi repository

.. code-block:: bash

   $ git clone https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasi

You should now have a directory structure like this:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ ls -lah
   ../
   ./
   wasi
   test-wasi-component

> Navigate into the **test-wasi-component** directory and modify the **Cargo.toml** file with an editor of your choice. We will 
> add the wasi crate to the dependencies section and the **proxy = true** configuration to the **[package.metadata.component]** 
> section. After applying the changes, your **Cargo.toml** should look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate into the **test-wasi-component** directory and modify the **Cargo.toml** file with the text editor of your choice. Add the wasi crate to the dependencies section and the **proxy = true** configuration to the **[package.metadata.component]** section. After saving the changes, your **Cargo.toml** file should look like this:
```

.. code-block:: toml

   [package]
   name = "test-wasi-component"
   version = "0.1.0"
   edition = "2021"

   [dependencies]
   bitflags = "2.4.2"
   wit-bindgen-rt = "0.21.0"
   wasi = { path = "../wasi" }

   [lib]
   crate-type = ["cdylib"]

   [package.metadata.component]
   package = "component:test-wasi-component"
   proxy = true

   [package.metadata.component.dependencies]

> The actual code from **src/lib.rs** will be like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The actual code from **src/lib.rs** should look like this:
```

.. code-block:: rust

   use wasi::http::types::{
      Fields, IncomingRequest, OutgoingBody, OutgoingResponse, ResponseOutparam,
   };

   wasi::http::proxy::export!(Component);

   struct Component;

   impl wasi::exports::http::incoming_handler::Guest for Component {
      fn handle(_request: IncomingRequest, response_out: ResponseOutparam) {

         let hdrs = Fields::new();
         let mesg = String::from("Hello, This is a Wasm Component using wasi/http:proxy!");
         let _try = hdrs.set(&"Content-Type".to_string(), &[b"plain/text".to_vec()]);
         let _try = hdrs.set(&"Content-Length".to_string(), &[mesg.len().to_string().as_bytes().to_vec()]);

         let resp = OutgoingResponse::new(hdrs);

         // Add the HTTP Response Status Code
         resp.set_status_code(200).unwrap();

         let body = resp.body().unwrap();
         ResponseOutparam::set(response_out, Ok(resp));

         let out = body.write().unwrap();
         out.blocking_write_and_flush(mesg.as_bytes()).unwrap();
         drop(out);

         OutgoingBody::finish(body, None).unwrap();
      }
   }

> As you can see, targeting the wasi crate requires some low-level Rust work by us. Not bad at all but something to consider when choosing this 
> option. For the **wasi/http:proxy** world there is an interface description available on `Github <https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-http/blob/main/proxy.md>`__ 
> which will help to write your code.

Reviewer: Targeting the wasi crate requires some low-level Rust work by us. Not bad at all, but something to consider when choosing this option. For the **wasi/http:proxy** world there is an interface description available on `Github <https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-http/blob/main/proxy.md>`__ which will help to write your code.```suggestion

```

Let's build the component. Inside of the **test-wasi-component** directory issue:

.. code-block:: bash
   
   $ cargo component build --release

> As you will notice, the build shows a very small dependency footprint! So is a major benefit from the wasi crate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The build shows a very small dependency footprint, so is a major benefit from the wasi crate.
```

To test the Component, we can use wasmtime serve.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ wasmtime serve target/wasm32-wasi/release/test_wasi_component.wasm

> The output should look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output should look like the following:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ wasmtime serve target/wasm32-wasi/release/test_wasi_component.wasm
     Serving HTTP on http://0.0.0.0:8080/

Sending a request to the exposed endpoint will output something like this:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ curl -v localhost:8080
   …
   > GET / HTTP/1.1
   > Host: localhost:8080
   > User-Agent: curl/8.4.0
   > Accept: */*
   >
   < HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   < content-type: plain/text
   < content-length: 54
   < date: Tue, 12 Mar 2024 12:28:56 GMT
   <
   * Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
   Hello, This is a Wasm Component using wasi/http:proxy!

************************************************************************
NGINX Unit for production grade Wasm workloads
************************************************************************

> While the **wasmtime-cli** is good for testing Wasm components locally, there are more requirements for production workloads. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the **wasmtime-cli**  interface is good for testing Wasm components locally, there are more requirements for production workloads. 
```

> With NGINX Units Wasm runtime, you will be able to run your Wasm workloads next to other host applications on a single host and make 
> use of all the other powerful Unit features. Given Units design and as we decoupled the listeners from the application runtime, you 
> can make full use of the Unit Router to make routing decisions before sharing a request with your Wasm Component or add HTTPS to 
> your stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With NGINX Units Wasm runtime, you will be able to run your Wasm workloads next to other host applications on a single host and make use of all the other powerful Unit features. Given Units design and as we decoupled the listeners from the application runtime, you can make full use of the Unit Router to make routing decisions before sharing a request with your Wasm Component or add HTTPS to your stack.
```

> To run the component on NGINX Unit, start Unit and send the initial configuration. Make sure you point to the Wasm component by 
> using an absolut path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the component on NGINX Unit, start Unit and send the initial configuration, make sure you point to the Wasm component by using an absolute path.
```

Create a **config.json** file:

.. code-block:: json

   {
      "listeners": {
         "127.0.0.1:8085": {
            "pass": "applications/my-wasm-component"
         }
      },
      "applications": {
         "my-wasm-component": {
            "type": "wasm-wasi-component",
            "component": "path/target/wasm32-wasi/release/test_wasi_component.wasm"
         }
      }
   }   

Apply the configuration using **unitc**:

.. code-block:: bash

   unitc config.json /config

> Sending a request to the exposed endpoint will create the same output but from a different runtime implemenation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sending a request to the exposed endpoint will create the same output from a different runtime implementation:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ curl -v localhost:8085
   …
   < HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   < content-type: plain/text
   < content-length: 54
   < Server: Unit/1.32.0
   < Date: Tue, 12 Mar 2024 15:16:13 GMT
   <
   * Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
   Hello, This is a Wasm Component using wasi/http:proxy!

This is the full power of Wasm Components. Build once - run on every runtime.

> ************************************************************************
> What's next?
> ************************************************************************
> The Wasm ecosystem and all its involved projects are changing very rapidly. For the better! Every week is full of new 
> features and things to work on, and NGINX Unit is keeping up! Our commitment to Wasm stays strong and we will keep 
> on working on implementing new features to our wasmtime integration and write more technical blog posts about Wasm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
************************************************************************
What's next?
************************************************************************

The Wasm ecosystem and all its associated projects are undergoing rapid and positive changes. Every week brings new features and opportunities for innovation. NGINX Unit remains dedicated to Wasm and will continue implementing new features in our Wasmtime integration and publishing technical blog posts about Wasm.
```

> Please share feedback about this blog post using our `GitHub discussions <https://github.com/nginx/unit/discussions>`__ 
> and let us know what you think is missing when it comes to the work with Wasm Components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel free to share your feedback about this blog post on our `GitHub discussions <https://github.com/nginx/unit/discussions>`__  pages. We'd love to know what you think is missing regarding the work with Wasm Components.
```
